📚 Add `AI_POLICY.md` (#7229)
aiidateam/aiida-core: AI_POLICY.md

# Policy of AiiDA on AI-assisted contributions

This document defines the [aiidateam organization's](https://github.com/aiidateam/) policy regarding AI-generated content.
This policy applies to all aspects of the AiiDA project, including all GitHub repositories under the `aiidateam` organization.

We expect to periodically review and update this policy as the landscape changes.

## Core philosophy

We recognize that AI tools have become part of the modern developer's toolbox and, as users of these tools ourselves, we would be dishonest to entirely prohibit their use.

> However, contributions must reflect genuine effort and understanding from the author: submitting AI-generated code without meaningful human input, verification, and comprehension is not acceptable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We recognize that AI tools have become part of the modern developer's toolbox. That said, external contributions must reflect genuine effort and understanding from the author: submitting AI-generated code without meaningful human input, verification, and comprehension is not acceptable.
```

## Contributor expectations

### Understand what you submit

**Every contributor bears full responsibility for what they submit.**
You must understand, verify, and be able to explain every line of code, every comment, and every design decision in your PR.
If reviewers perceive a lack of understanding (from the code itself, PR descriptions, or interactions during review), we reserve the right to close the PR.

Before contributing, we encourage you to engage with the project and familiarize yourself with the codebase, and to discuss proposed changes with maintainers (via a [GitHub issue](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-core/issues) or [Discourse](https://aiida.discourse.group/)) before opening a PR.

### Verify your code locally

Before requesting review, contributors must ensure that all CI checks pass (`uv run pre-commit ...`, including `ruff`, `mypy`, etc.), all added/modified tests pass (`uv run pytest ...`), and documentation builds (`uv run sphinx-build ...`) without errors if applicable.

> PRs that fail CI and show signs of being unverified AI output will be closed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PRs that fail CI and receive no further attention from the contributor will be closed. The same goes for PRs that show signs of being unverified AI output.
```

The reviewing capacity of this project is limited, and maintainer time will be prioritized toward high-quality contributions from engaged contributors.
PRs that appear to lack understanding of the codebase may not get reviewed and will eventually be closed.
Remember that prioritizing your time over that of reviewers is not in the spirit of open source collaboration.

Code review is a collaborative, human process — not a mechanism for debugging AI-generated code.
We expect contributors to engage meaningfully with reviewers and apply feedback thoughtfully.
Simply feeding reviewer comments back into an LLM to regenerate a PR is not acceptable; if you cannot engage with the review yourself, open a bug report or feature request instead.

Do not post AI-generated comments or summaries unless you genuinely agree with them and take full responsibility for their accuracy.
All LLM output *looks* plausible — it is your responsibility to ensure it is also correct.
Verbose or off-topic comments may be marked as spam.

A high volume of low-effort PRs is demoralizing and has driven many good maintainers away from open source.

> We are committed to mentoring new contributors, and this dynamic threatens that commitment.

Author: Fair enough!

**Every contributor bears full responsibility for what they submit.**
You must understand, verify, and be able to explain every line of code, every comment, and every design decision in your PR.

## Legal considerations

There is ongoing legal uncertainty regarding the copyright status of LLM-generated content and its provenance.
Since this project does not have a formal [Contributor License Agreement](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Contributor_license_agreement) (CLA), contributors retain copyright over their changes.
Allowing LLM-generated code into the codebase therefore has unpredictable consequences for the project's copyright status (even setting aside possible copyright violations due to plagiarism).

Every contribution must be backed by a human who holds the copyright for the changes submitted or has the legal right to contribute them under this project's license.
By submitting a PR, you certify that you are the author of the contribution and that you understand it.
"An LLM wrote it" is not an acceptable response to questions or critique.

## Contributor expectations

> ### Understand what you submit

Reviewer 2: I agree with @danielhollas to move the expectations section before the legal one, but then this subsection is very similar to the last paragraph of the core philosophy. Maybe we can remove the last sentence there?
